# What is calculus?

Calculus is a branch of mathematics concerned with finding the **rate of change** of a function with respect to a variable on which it depends.

Examples:

* How does the rate of growth of bacteria change as the temperature of the environment changes?
* How is the number of cases of a disease changing with time, i.e. how fast is the disease spreading?

Calculus is closely related to the field of **optimisation**.

---

## Aims of this lesson

We now provide a brief overview of what will be covered in this lesson.

* Motivate the **intuition** behind calculus.
* Provide the formal definition of a **derivative from first principles**.
* Learn how to use the **power**, **product** and **quotient** rules for differentiating more complex functions.

---

## A motivating example: the tortoise and the hare

We start with a motivating example of why calculus might be useful.

I'm sure many of us are familiar with the famous story of the tortoise racing the hare. The tortoise's tactic is to move slowly and steadily to the finish line. The complacent hare starts off quickly, then slows down and stops for a rest, before realising the tortoise is about to win and speeds to the finish. The tortoise wins.

If an animal covers more distance in a fixed amount of time, it will be travelling faster. This is represented by a steeper line on the distance-time graphs shown here. When the hare stops for a rest, the line is flat, meaning that no extra distance is covered during that time.

The tortoise moves 1km in 1 hour throughout the race. The straight line reflects that the tortoise moved at a constant speed, so we can conclude that the tortoise's speed was 1km/h throughout the whole race. We can double-check this claim by choosing another portion of the race, e.g. between 0.2 and 0.6 hours, and we see that the tortoise moved 0.4 km in 0.4 hours. Therefore, since speed equals distance divided by time, the speed in this portion of the race is 0.4 divided by 0.4 which is also 1km/h.

However, it is not so simple to compute the speed of the hare at any given point, because the speed (and gradient) is changing all the time. This is where calculus comes in. We will come back to this example later but will look more at computing gradients in general for now.

---

## Notation

In calculus, there is no single notation for differentiation. Instead, several different notations for the derivative of a function or variable have been proposed by different mathematicians. The usefulness of each notation varies with the context, and it can depend on the form that the function is provided to us.

For example, functions can be written as $f(x) =$ something. Or they can be written as $y =$ something. If the function is written with the "f" notation, then the derivative (or gradient function) is usually written with the "f prime" notation. Whereas if the function was written with "y" equals, then the derivative is usually written with "dy" over "dx". These are the most common notations we use, and they will be used interchangeably during this session.

* There are multiple ways to write **functions**:
  1. $f(x) = 3x+4$
  2. $y = 3x+4$
* And multiple ways to write their corresponding **gradient functions**:
  1. $f^\prime(x)$
  2. $\frac{dy}{dx}$

A final piece of important notation is that "delta", represented by the triangle, denotes the change in a variable over a specific period. Say if we are interested in the time period between 5 and 15 seconds, then the change in time would be 15 minus 5 = 10 seconds. So "delta" t would equal 10.

* $\Delta x$ is the **change** in $x$.

We use this notation to look first at the gradient of a straight line, and then differentiation from first principles.

---

## Gradient of a straight line = $\frac{\Delta y}{\Delta x}$

The distance-time graph for the tortoise was a straight line, and this made it easy for us to compute the speed, and therefore the gradient. The gradient of a straight line refers to its slope. The slope is constant for a straight line (that's what makes it straight!) and the official definition of the gradient of a straight line is the change in $y$ ("delta" $y$) divided by the change in $x$ ("delta" $x$).

The examples on this graph show lines with varying gradients. The blue line is very steep and has a positive gradient (it goes "uphill"). The steepness of this line means it has a large gradient, because for a fixed change in $x$, the change in $y$ is greater than it is, for say, the orange line.

The orange line is a shallower slope, but it is still positive. The green line is flat, so the gradient is zero. This is because for any interval of $x$, the change in $y$ is zero. Looking at the formula, the numerator would be 0.

The red line shows a line with a negative gradient. For any interval of $x$, the change in $y$ between the start of the interval and the end will be negative, as it's moving downhill. This means that the numerator of the equation for the gradient will be a negative number.

In the real world, most of our functions are not straight lines, so we now move on to differentiation, to find the gradients of any type of line.

---

## Differentiation from first principles

We now look at the graph of $f(x) = x^2$. We are interested in knowing the gradient (or rate of change) at any given point along the line. If we used the same approach we did for straight lines, we would get the *average* gradient in that region. For example, for $x$ between 4 and 6, the change in $f(x)$ is 20 (6 squared minus 4 squared). This yields an average gradient of 20 divided by 2 (which is 10) in this region. However we are interested in knowing the gradient at a very specific point, not the average over a region. We can see that the slope of the curve is constantly changing.

One approach could be to choose our point of interest, for example, $x=4$, and draw a straight line which just touches our graph at that point, called a tangent. We could then compute the gradient of that straight tangent line using the method we have just covered. While that is a legitimate approach, it isn't very practical in the real world, and relies on good drawing!

So instead, we go back to the triangle approach but now imagine we can continually shrink the triangle to make our change in $x$ infinitesimally small. We will then be able to take the average gradient over an incredibly small region, which will allow us to be more confident about our computed value for the gradient. This is the fundamental theory behind differentiation, and is what we call differentiation from first principles:

$$f^\prime(x) = \text{lim}_{\Delta x \rightarrow 0}  \Big( \frac{f(x+\Delta x) - f(x)}{\Delta x} \Big)$$

So we can compute the change in y over the change in x and take the limit of that function as we force the change of $x$ to go towards zero to compute the gradient at a particular point $x$. We denote the gradient of the function $f(x)$ by $f'(x)$. The numerator of the fraction in the brackets corresponds to the change in height ($y$) for a function at a point $x$. When $f(x) = x^2$, we can plug this into the equation for the derivative:

$$\Longrightarrow f^{\prime}(x) = \lim_{\Delta x\to 0}  \left(\frac{(x+\Delta x)^{2} - x^{2}}{\Delta x}\right) = \lim_{\Delta x \to 0} (2x + \Delta x) = 2x$$

We expand the brackets in the squared term in the numerator and notice that we end up with x squared minus x squared, which cancels each other out. We can then divide all terms by $\Delta x$ to get that the derivative is the limit as $\Delta x$ goes to 0, of $\Delta x$ plus $2x$. As $\Delta x$ goes to zero, this part becomes negligible, so we are left with $2x$. This is our derivative, also known as a gradient function.

So the gradient of the line at $x = 3$ is 2 times 3 (6). And this works for any value of $x$ we wish to plug in.

Next, we look at some tips and tricks for differentiating common functions we will come across.

---

## Rule #1: power rule

It is possible to compute a derivative by first principles, but there are quick tricks we can remember to save time and effort when the functions become complicated. The first one we cover is the power rule for polynomial differentiation. A polynomial is a function which contains terms of the form of x to the power of a non-negative integer (such as 0, 1, 2, 3 etc).

Let $f(x) = x^n$ where $n$ is a non-negative integer, then:

$$f^\prime(x) = n x^{n-1}$$

> "Bring the power down and subtract 1 from the power."

The derivative in this case is n times $x$ to the power of $n - 1$. We are bringing the power down and then subtracting 1 from the original power. This also works if we have $f(x)$ equals a constant times $x$ to the power $n$, or if we have a sum of polynomial terms. See the following example:

**Example:**

$f(x) = 3x^6 - 5x + 3$

$f^\prime(x) = 18x^5 - 5$

We can also compute derivatives of functions using the sympy package in Python. The example shows this here:

```python
x = sym.Symbol('x')
sym.diff(3*x**6 -5*x + 3)
```

---

## Rule #2: trigonometric functions

Trigonometric functions, like sine and cosine, have interesting properties when we consider their gradients. The graph on the left shows f(x) = sin(x). The derivative of this function is in fact the cosine function, which is shown on the right. For the graph on the left, we see that the gradient starts off positive, and then gets shallower and shallower until it reaches 0 somewhere between x = 1 and x = 2. If we compare this to the graph of the gradient on the right-hand side, we see that the gradient starts off positive (at 1) and then decreases (corresponding to the slope of the sine graph getting shallower) until it reaches 0 at the same point we see the flat line on the sine graph. Therefore, we conclude that the derivative of the cosine function is the negative of the sine function, so we can keep differentiating these functions to loop through sine, cosine, negative sine, negative cosine, sine and so on.

Formally, we have:

$$f(x) = \sin (x) \implies f^\prime(x) = \cos(x)$$

$$f(x) = \cos (x) \implies f^\prime(x) = -\sin(x)$$

---

## Rule #3: exponential function

The next function that we consider is the exponential function, which also has a very interesting property in relation to gradients. The exponential function is denoted by $e$ to the power of $x$, where $e$ is a number - it's 2.718... However, the importance of this number is that the gradient of the function is equal to the function itself.

$$f(x) = e^x \implies f^\prime(x) = e^x$$

Let's look at the graph to see this: when $x$ is close to 0, the slope is very shallow, so the gradient is small. As $x$ increases, the line gets steeper and steeper, which means the gradient increases. So the gradient of the function at point $x = 1$ is $e^1$. The gradient when $x = 0$ is $e^0 = 1$. For a large negative value of $x$, the gradient is $e$ to the power of a very negative number, which is close to 0.

---

## Rule #4: the product rule

The next rule we consider is the product rule, which is used when we have a product of two functions of $x$. We write this generally as $f(x) = u(x) v(x)$ for two further functions $u$ and $v$. The product rule states that the derivative of such an expression is:

$$\implies f^\prime(x) = u(x) v^\prime(x) + v(x) u^\prime(x)$$

> "The first times the derivative of the second, plus the second times the derivative of the first."

The product rule could be used iteratively. For example, if $v(x)$ was a product of two other functions, then to compute the derivative of $v(x)$ you'd need to use the product rule within the product rule.

Now pay attention to the following example:

**Example:**

$f(x) = x e^x$

$f^\prime(x) = x e^x + e^x$

In our example, $u(x) = x$ so $u'(x) = 1$. $v(x) = e^x$ so $v'(x) = e^x$. Plugging this into the formula gives the derivative as $e^x + xe^x$, which can be confirmed by sympy:

```python
x = sym.Symbol('x')
sym.diff(x * sym.exp(x))
```

We now move on to the intuition behind the product rule, to see where the formula comes from.

---

## The product rule: intuition

When you multiply two lengths together you get the area of a rectangle. So we can think about $u(x)$ representing the height of a rectangle, and $v(x)$ representing the width.

$f(x)$ represents the area. The area of the grey rectangle is $u(x)$ times $v(x)$. Consider what happens to the area of the rectangle as $u(x)$ and $v(x)$ change by delta u and delta v respectively. The area of the whole rectangle now becomes ($u(x) + \Delta u$) times ($v(x) + \Delta v$). We can expand these brackets out and then subtract the area of the grey rectangle to get the change in area. This represents the area of the yellow, green and blue rectangles.

Formally, we have:

$$\text{Change in area} = \Big(u(x) + \Delta u\Big) \Big(v(x) + \Delta v\Big) - u(x) v(x)$$

$$= \Delta u \, v(x) + \Delta v \, u(x) + \Delta u \Delta v$$

$$\implies \frac{d}{dx}\Big( u(x) \times v(x)\Big) = u(x) v^\prime(x) + v(x) u^\prime(x)$$

---

## Rule #5: the quotient rule

The next rule we look at is the quotient rule, which is used to find the derivative of a function which is the ratio of two differentiable functions.

Since dividing by 0 is not defined, it is important that $v(x)$ is not always equal to 0. It could equal 0 sometimes, but the derivative won't be defined for those values of $x$. If it was equal to 0 all the time, then the derivative would never be defined.

To differentiate $u(x)$ divided by $v(x)$, the quotient rule states that:

$$f(x) = \frac{u(x)}{v(x)}$$

$$\implies f^\prime(x) = \frac{v(x) u^\prime(x) - u(x) v^\prime(x)}{v(x)^2}$$

Take a look at the following example:

**Example:**

$f(x) = \frac{e^x}{x}$

$f'(x) = \frac{e^x x - e^x}{x^2} = \frac{e^x (x - 1)}{x^2}$

In the example, $u(x) = e^x$ and $v(x) = x$. Therefore, $u'(x) = e^x$ and $v'(x) = 1$. Plugging this into the quotient rule gives $x e^x - e^x$ all divided by $x^2$. This can be verified with the following code:

```python
x = sym.Symbol('x')
sym.diff(sym.exp(x) / x)
```